and once again by our chief medical
officer professor Chris Witte and the
chief scientific adviser Sir Patrick
valance from the very beginning of this
crisis I followed the advice of our
world leading scientists to defeat
corona virus by taking the right
measures at the right time what
everybody needs to recognize is that our
NHS like any world-class Health Service
has only limited numbers of doctors
nurses and specialist equipment so the
more people who become sick at any one
time the harder it is for the NHS to
cope and so it's vital to delay the
spread of the disease and reduce the
number of people needing hospital
treatment any one time
that's why we've given that clear
instruction that people must stay at
home unless they have one of the reasons
we've set out and with your help we will
slow the spread of the disease I want to
thank everyone who's been following the
clear rules that we set out on Monday
and I want to thank everyone in the NHS
the front line of the fight against
coronavirus and of course all our public
services our teachers and our school
staff the transport workers police
officers everyone who's keeping this
country going but I also want to offer a
special thank you to everyone who is now
volunteered to help the NHS when we
launched the appeal last night we hoped
to get 250,000 volunteers over a few
days but I can tell you that in just 24
hours
four hundred and five thousand people
have responded to the call they will be
driving medicines from pharmacies to
patients they'll be bringing patients
home from hospital very importantly
they'll be making regular phone calls to
check on and support people who are
staying on their own and
and they will be absolutely crucial in
the fight against this virus that is
already in one day as many volunteers as
the population of Coventry and so to all
of you and to all were former NHS staff
who are coming back now into the service
I say thank you on behalf of the entire
country now I want to take some
questions
but finally I want to remind everyone of
our core policy stay at home protect the
NHS and save lives thank you I think
we'll go straight to two questions now
and we are going to hear first of all I
think from Laura Coons Berg of the BBC
Laura are you there yes and Prime
Minister can you honestly say that the
government is coping there aren't enough
tests people are struggling to make ends
meet and some people are being forced to
go to work when they don't feel that
they are safe is that coping and can I
ask the medics as well if we already had
the kinds of numbers of tests that you
would like to see how much of a
difference would it have made to your
ability to fight the disease well first
of all Laura on the on the tests a huge
national program of testing is being
rolled out but I'll hand over to to
Patrick and to Chris to say a little bit
more about testing and how we're going
to do it but on the the national effort
to protect those who whose jobs whose
livelihoods are threatened I think
everybody understands the challenge that
the whole country now faces but we have
to get through this together and we are
getting through it together with an
unprecedented program of support for not
just for businesses but for workers of
all kinds across the country never in
our history has the government put its
arms around people in the way that we
are doing now to help them get through
this difficult time and
yes it's absolutely true that the
measures to support people in employment
are exceptional and extraordinary 80
percent of of your salary up to 2500
pounds per month were standing behind
were also in the course of the next
couple of days you're hearing more from
reishi soon ACK the Chancellor tomorrow
about what we're doing to help the
self-employed and I think people do
understand that the complexity of their
working arrangements isn't as many has
been harder to come up with the right
tailored program for the self-employed
as well but that is coming forward
tomorrow and yes I do think that when
you look at the sheer scale of what the
government is doing to get this country
through we will to answer your question
directly we will cope and we are coping
very well indeed under the most
challenging possible circumstances but
the most important thing to enable us to
get through it well together and to come
out well together as I think we can as I
know we can is that we all follow the
instructions that the government has
given stay at home protect the NHS and
that's the way to save lives but on
testing that's Kris would you like to
say some more in terms of testing there
are a variety of different things you
use testing for some of which we have
tests available for and have done
throughout some of which we do not so
I'm going to run through them because
they're different answers to depend on
which you're talking about starting off
with the antigen testing which is
testing the people who currently got a
disease we initially were using that to
help screen people who came from
high-risk countries when that ceased to
be a sensible policy we've moved on to
testing people in intensive care and in
hospitals and we have sufficient tests
for that at the moment the system for
that is working fine and is being scaled
up so that side of testing is in place
and is working well so if the patient
gets as far as a hospital we're
confident on the testing and on the
scale of the thing we would like to do
next which would certainly make a
difference less to the disease but
Daphna to the HS is being able to test
NHS and other critical workers who are
self isolating who currently are not
being tested because we do not have
sufficient testing this is a global
problem because basically every country
is wanting this new test which for a
disease that wasn't actually being
tested for anywhere at three of three
months ago so everybody wants this so
there is a global shortage and that's a
bottleneck for us but the next priority
is to get critical workers back to work
or to say to them you have got this so
we definitely would like that not to
fight the disease but to support the NHS
once we have more testing than we need
for that capacity then we want to go out
to test a much wider range of people
with mild symptoms some people already
having it as part of our surveillance
system but we obviously like to go wider
but that's the prioritization list and
then separately there are the tests
which we will want to have which are not
yet absolutely evaluated but are going
to be critical once you've got them that
can tell someone whether they have had
the virus so this is the antibody test
you can't do that in the first few days
after someone's had a fever but after a
few a few weeks possibly as short as one
week and that will allow us to be able
to say to NHS workers to other workers
look you've had this infection at least
for the short time and possibly for
quite a long time we think it's like
you're protected against this and you
can go back to work and be confident you
get another coffin fever that is not
going to be coronavirus but that's
that's the sort of technology that's
quite close but and it's being evaluated
this week but it's not there on the
first one our bottleneck is largely
global shortages which we are obviously
doing our level best to free up because
it would make it a lot lot better for us
to be able to test healthcare workers
and now for sure it's absolutely crucial
and yes we need more of it as Chris has
said and the other thing that's going to
be important with the antibody test is
to be able to work out how many people
have had the disease a symptomatically
and that's going to be important to
understand what to do next so these
tests are crucially important we need
more of them and people are working very
hard to get them in place
the one thing I finally out I think is
the one thing is worse than no test is a
bad test yes so telling someone
inaccurately either they have had it or
have not had it could lead to dangerous
mistakes being made so we do not want to
go ahead with testing until we're
confidence or of the technology and that
that is so important that if it means a
delay to get there that delay is worth
having because that is as chris said if
you tell someone it's okay you haven't
got it they have got it that is not a
good position to be in if you tell
somebody they're immune from it and
they're not that is not a good position
to be in so we must make sure that we
get the quality of this absolutely right
just Patrick all the numbers of people
who have the disease ate a
symptomatically there was a study I saw
quoted from some Oxford academic saying
that as many as 50% may have had it
asymptomatic or I think a lot of people
have seen that that story how do you how
do you evaluate that at this stage we
simply don't know at the moment and
there that's why the antibody test is so
important so there are estimates that up
to 80% or more people in wuhan weren't
detected there are estimates that of
those who are positive so that's a small
percentage of the population who were
tested positive quite a number of them
were asymptomatic in a town in Italy but
we haven't we don't know at a general
population level and that's why it's so
important to get this test in place
Thank You Beth 3b Sky News Thank You
prime minister just a couple of
questions you said earlier you're not
closing down the whole of the UK economy
but other countries such as in Italy a
country you said we were two or three
weeks behind have now introduced a very
strict locked down lockdown wouldn't you
save more lives if you did keep all
non-essential workers at home and if I
may a question on testing CMOS PhD
england has said today 3.5 million
testing kits could be available showing
whether you've had grown a virus or not
as early as next week in practical terms
who will get those tests and how and in
broader terms how transformational do
you think this will be in terms of
fighting coronavirus thank you well
thanks very much Beth in in terms of the
epidemiological value of what we're
doing in in asking people to stay at
home I think possibly the most important
I can say just repeat the basic message
which is that if you can stay at home
then you overwhelmingly should stay at
her and that's our our most important
advice if it's absolutely necessary for
you to to go to work to a place of work
then it's vital that your employer
follows the rules as set out by public
health England and ensures that you have
the protections that you need and the
proper rules on on social distancing do
apply but I wonder whether I could could
ask either I suppose just to comment on
on the on the the value of what we're
doing in terms of the you know Beth asks
reasonably enough about not closing down
the whole UK economy which were not
doing but we're simply asking people to
just stay at home
is it really you want to say like I can
certainly give a given answer the
pattern you might want to add to this I
mean the first thing is that the
modelling every country does this
slightly differently and every country
has got a slightly different epidemic
epidemic pattern at this point in time
so that's entirely reasonable and all of
us of course are dealing with a new
infection and therefore are having to
take the science from quite a low base
very fast in terms of the advice we give
but the modelling we have done here
which Patrick can talk about in more
detail was was based on the idea that
piece sum that quite a lot of people
would have to go to work as part of this
and that the MOT that is the basis on
which the modelling is done but we
absolutely need people to avoid anything
that is in any way discretionary where
people can choose whether they do it or
not so that's why all other social
activity all other mixing between
households has to stop is to allow these
absolutely essential things to continues
that's that's the basis of doing this
there is an additional reason which is
we have to remember that this is these
many of the things we have to do are
going to be have to be sustained for a
reasonably long period of time and
broadly the more difficult you make it
for people that less easy it is to
sustain so there is some degree of
trade-off between those two things in
terms of testing I want I want to be
really clear about what we can and can't
do We certainly have a required for the
UK a lot of tests but I would go back to
my previous answer and Patrick's
previous answer the key thing for us to
do is now to evaluate are these tests
accurate enough to be used by the
general public and if the answer is
they're all incredibly accurate then we
will work out the right the most quick
and effective way to release these if it
turned out none of the more accurate we
would not wish to release any of them
because inaccurate testing isn't and is
something which we really should be
avoiding so the thing we are going to do
really fast is the evaluation and then
based on that evaluation we'll be able
to decide what to next that anyway
perhaps you want to add anything on the
modeling side well the only thing I
realize is what we're trying to do is to
break the transmission of virus from one
household to another we're trying to
break the transmission of virus in
society to do that we need to keep
separate and the clearest way to keep
separate is to stay in your house and
that's why that's the core message there
are people who have to go to work in
some jobs who cannot stay in their house
all day and the most obvious one is in
the NHS but there are others as well and
then it's important to break the
transmission where possible to stay two
metres apart and that's what we need to
keep focusing on we're trying to stop
the transmission of this virus between
people between households and break that
chain in terms of whether it's
transformational in the long run the
answer is it will completely transform
what we can do in the short run this
antibody test which is the one that
we're talking about these big numbers I
think is less important than the other
one the antigen test Li which I was
talking about earlier in a previous to
the previous answer
thanks and I should just I should have
said more clearly perhaps at the
beginning that you should stay at home
except for those very few exceptions I
just spell them out again that people
have forgotten its unless you need to
get essential supplies Beth unless
you're on a specific medical mission or
or helping the vulnerable or unless
you're taking daily exercise and
remember that daily exercise is a very
important provided you stay away from
from other people Gary Gibbon Channel 4
Prime Minister the frontline staff in
the National Health Service and in
working in social care couldn't be
clearer they want that test on covert 19
that tells them whether they got it they
want it now and in the House of Commons
again and again today you said they're
gonna get it as soon as possible people
might have a little bit more confidence
about where we're going as a country if
you could answer this question mainly
how did we come to be so woefully behind
other countries that have checked
evaluated and deployed tests in much
much bigger numbers already well thanks
thanks Gary I repeat the answer that I
gave earlier in the House of Commons we
will do it as soon as possible we are
massively ramping up our our testing
programs buying in huge numbers of tests
to see whether you've you've had it
already but also pushing forward very
fast on testing people to see whether
they currently have it the the the
antigen or the antibody tests that have
been described and as as Matt Hancock
the Health Secretary has said were going
up from from 5,000 to 10,000 tests per
day to 25,000 and so on hopefully very
soon up to 250,000 a day but to answer
your question about you know that the
types of tests that we have the
differences that that you see in between
the UK's provision for testing and other
countries I think it probably would be
most helpful if I again passed to to
Chris and to Patrick to explain Chris I
mean I think that in terms of the
testing so first of all why the delays
in the UK system there are multiple
components of these tests including the
chemicals and make them up the swabs
that you use and the reportage is along
many of these supply chains essentially
because every country in the world is
simultaneously wanting this new thing
some components of it are old but the
scale of this is something which is
obviously occurred at extraordinary
speed and that's just a practical
reality and I think anyone who
understands how supply chains work and
the huge demand for this there is
globally would understand that I think
comparing different countries is
actually quite different it's quite
difficult different countries have got
different testing strategies but you're
certainly right that what we need to do
is look at those countries that have
actually got more testing than us and
work out how to do it the way they're
doing it as best we can in our own
system using our own testing systems
that's something we're doing very
actively at the moment clearly we're
doing a lot of testing here though for
example I mean looking at the numbers
we've done so far
97 thousand tests already conducted is
not that there is no testing going on
what we need clearly is to be able to
scale it up and and I would just add to
that that we've done many more tests not
with this as a competition we'd have
many more tests than than most other
European countries and you're totally
right Gary that the priority should be
and we'll be getting those tests to our
frontline staff in the NHS and as I said
we are working we're going to do that as
fast as we possibly can
Francis Elliot of The Times yes hello
but a public health England this morning
suggested that these tests these
antibody tests if they work could be
available from online stores and from
boots can we just explain I understand
that they they may not work but if they
do work how are you gonna prioritize who
gets those tests or is it just going to
be a scramble and how do you verify the
test results presumably these will be
critically important about whether you
can work with vulnerable people you know
even sort of begin to go back to normal
work perhaps and lastly how do you
collect the kind of results so that you
can
model what's happening elsewhere it
seems it seems odd that you know you do
self testing and this is obviously a
very important result so what we'll do
is once we're confident of which tests
work and how many therefore we've got
available to use there's a hierarchy of
things that we need to do we need to
start off by finding earth answering
that critical question that Patrick was
talking about how what proportion of
people get this without any symptoms
because that has big implications for
the way we then manage this that's a
very early priority then we need to help
make sure we can get NHS workers tested
to make sure we can work out who is
immune or most certain immune to this
test either to this to this infection
and who isn't and we will basically go
out in kind of a graded way from there I
do not think and I want to be clear that
this is something will suddenly be
ordering on the internet next week we
need to go through the evaluation then
the first critical uses and then spread
it out from that point of view and we
need to do that in a systematic way and
your point which is right the first
thing we need to do is to collect the
information to understand this epidemic
so it's not 3.5 million free for all
with no data being collected we need to
answer the critical questions and need
to make sure the right people get the
test first in order to allow workers to
go back and the other points that Chris
is made
thanks very much Patrick Sam Lister the
Express Dave press prime minister your
critics have suggested that you've had
to be dragged into taking the action you
announced on Monday and that you've
allowed the virus to spread do you
regret not going further sooner and also
if I may you suggested in the Commons
earlier that you might introduce new
laws to deal with profiteering are you
angry at retailers and individuals who
are trying to exploit this crisis and
how far are you prepared to go could it
include jail terms
thanks very much Sam well on the on the
first very important question as I said
right in the beginning and indeed right
at the beating of this crisis we were
do the right measures at the right time
not according to a political dictate but
according to the best scientific a
medical advice in the world and there
are good reasons for wanting to tackle
an epidemic strictly in accordance with
the scientific adviser that is what we
have done and I continue to believe that
that is the right the right approach for
this country as a right approach for the
UK we have the best scientific advice in
the world and we will continue to follow
it on your other important question
about profiteering I dislike it very
much and I do not want to see people
profiteering people exploiting people's
need at a critical time a national
emergency so we work we are indeed
looking very carefully at what is going
on the competition Markets Authority
already has various powers that it may
use but we are looking at the
legislative framework to see what it may
be necessary to do to prevent
profiteering justices has happened you
know in in wartime many many years ago
there anything you want to add on any of
that I mean the most important measures
got put in place first and that's the
right thing to do washing hands was
critical isolating household isolation
get these things and now we've got a
very strong package in and the one thing
I would say it's incredibly important
that we stick to it it's incredibly
important that people understand that
this is about breaking the transmission
of the virus and we can only do that if
we all do it that is absolutely right
thank you David Hughes PA last question
David Hughes PA
Prime Minister by tomorrow we'll already
be too late for many self-employed
people who have already found themselves
in hardship or being forced to risk
their health and that of others by
continuing to work what's your message
to them and will you apologize for the
delay in providing them with the kind of
support that employed workers have
already been given and to the CMO and
what's the current occupation rate of
critical care beds in England and can
you be confident that the measures
announced over the past week will
prevent that capacity being overwhelmed
well thanks very much David and I just
really repeat what I've said before I
think the government has moved with the
extraordinary speed to support and prop
up the the whole of the economy of this
country putting our arms around workers
of all kinds to the best extent that we
possibly can and yes of course it was
easier to move farthest and fastest with
employees because their PA ye details
are of course available it's been more
complex as you can understand to support
the self-employed because that they have
there are many different arrangements
that they have and it's been it's been
tricky to work out a package that will
address the needs of as many people as
possible but that is being done it's
being done at incredible speed Richey
soon out will be announcing a package
tomorrow
and I genuinely don't think there's been
a time in our in our history in the last
in the last century certainly when the
government of this country has has put
its arms around so many people to get us
through a very very tough time we will
get through it and and we will get
through it together
so at this point in time critical cares
as of today there is not enormous
pressure on critical cares compared to a
bad or even normal winter day for
example in their chests today but we
expect the demand for critical care beds
to continue to rise over the next two
weeks that is entirely what we expect to
happen and that is what will happen over
that time so clearly the demand is going
to go up from the coronavirus now the
cause of the actions that people are
taking and provided everybody continues
to keep the social distancing measures
which are very difficult in terms of
staying within households only doing
absolutely essential things apart from
exercise that will help to pull down the
demand a very long way that is how
people in the general general public all
of us are helping to protect the NHS at
the same time the NHS is increasing
supply by either a combination of
pushing out in time
things which are can be postponed and
increasing the critical back hair and
particularly the ventilated bed to
capacity over the next week's and we are
you know this is going to be a close-run
thing we all know that and anybody who
looks around the world can see this is
going to be difficult for every health
system but the the measures that have
been announced for the general public
which all of us have to do if the NHS is
to get through this without exceeding
its capacity and the work by the
fantastic work by the NHS and cut my
colleagues in the NHS to increase supply
that is the way that we will narrow this
gap to the smallest possible gap over
the next three weeks and you know we do
think that if everybody everybody sticks
to the staying in your household unless
absolutely essential this gap will be
probably manageable by the NHS but we
cannot guarantee that and nobody who is
sensible would wish to guarantee that
but we think that is what we are
planning for and that is what we intend
to happen right well thanks everybody
very much our thanks to the Friends of
the media for their questions thank you
to you all for tuning in and and
watching this hope that it has been
useful and we'll be back tomorrow or
there'll be another update more are here
from Downing Street on the fight against
coronavirus but remember the essentials
we will beat this we will beat it
together and we will do it by protecting
our NHS staying at home and that is how
we will save lives
Prime Minister bringing to an end the
latest daily press briefing from Downing
Street let's remind ourselves just now
of the main points from that daily
briefing Boris Johnson says that 4400
and 5,000 people who signed up to act as
NHS volunteers following the request
from the government the government's
chief medical adviser Chris witty
[Music]
you